# DS4A_Data-Science_Project

In this project, the causal relationship between the prevalence of heart diseases in the United States and the risk factors, healthcare opportunities and socio-economic factors was explored using the heart diseases dataset from the center for diseases control. Although many works have used this data to answer various questions, few or none have considered integrating these different categories, i.e., risk factors, healthcare opportunities and socio-economic factors in their analyses. Focusing on the selection of best factors for predicting the prevalence of heart diseases as it was done in this project can be beneficial to healthcare stakeholders in every city by helping them identify the most crucial influencing factors that should be focused on. 

The dataset was downloaded from the CDC website as “.csv” files with each file representing one variable. For each file, there are 3226 rows representing all the counties in the USA and there are 4 columns: county code, county name, state and the variable that is represented by that .csv file.  38 such files were downloaded, and a python script was written to combine them all while filtering multiple instances of county code, county name, and state to avoid repetitions. The resulting dataset is one that combines all the variables, having 40 columns and 3226 rows.

In this study, models based on principal components regression, ordinary linear regression, Lasso regression and LassoCV regression were developed. It was found that the Lasso regression model performed best in predicting the prevalence of heart disease with high R-squared and least error margin. Also, the results from this analysis show that, of all the 40 variables considered in this study, only 12 are important to produce the best predictive model. The study suggests, for example, that amongst other health risk factors, cholesterol, rather than diabetes and obesity, is the most influencing factor of prevalence of heart diseases and that both diabetes and obesity may not be considered for building the best model thus highlighting the danger of holding perceptions about variables before exploring data and underscoring the importance of exploratory analysis of the data before models are built. It is important to mention, however, that these findings are based on the data explored in this project and that different findings may be obtained if another dataset is used.
